#labels Phase-Requirements
=Milestone 3: Final Project Proposal (group work)=
  * Mike Hoffert - mlh374
  * Syed Ahsan Rizvi - sar457
  * Hattan Alsharif - haa775
  * Da Tao - dat293
  * Michael Butler - mdb815

==1.1 System description==
FBMS is an automated backup and revision program. The user specifies a folder that they want to keep backed up (the "live directory") and the location to store the backup (the "backup directory"). The program automatically searches the live directory for changes in intervals, and copies changes to the backup directory. Revisions are automatically created by creating diff ("patch") files for every change.

Thus, not only is the user's data backed up, but older versions of the data are also backed up. FBMS can be thought of as a hybrid of a local-only Dropbox and a version control system. While it's not as customizeable as a version control system like SVN or git, FBMS is easy to use and runs in the background without the need for user interaction.

==1.2 Business case==
  * No need to have Internet to store files, and just using the local hard drive.
  * Retrieving a file whenever you want, and modify it if you want.

==1.3 User-level goals for the system==
Blah blah blah

==1.4 User scenarios==
Yodel-dee-yay-hoo

==1.5 Scope document==
There! There! Wolves!

==1.6 Project plan / Rough estimates==
Blah blaaaaah

==1.7 User involvement plan==
8==3

==1.8 Low fidelity prototypes==
Seeree-us stuf gose heer

==1.9 Project management report==
Make sure you delete this drivel when we fill this out

==1.10 Project plan==
No seriously...

==1.11 Toy Example==
In retrospective, this hurts to read